Project Title: title goes here 
(Project Proposal for CS 175, Winter 2017) 
List of Team Members:
Name1, StudentID1, uci_email_address 
[ Name2, StudentID2, uci_email_address ]

1. Project Summary 
A clear description (2 or 3 sentences) that summarizes your project: e.g., “This
project will use XX methods to predict YY using the Z1 and Z2 data sets, with evaluation using
classification accuracy and user studies.” 

2. Problem Definition 
Write a few sentences that clearly
defines what problem you will be trying to solve. One way to describe this is to think about your
project in terms of inputs and outputs: what will the inputs to your system be and what will it
produce as output?  If you can, add a sentence that mentions 1 or 2 techniques  (that you know of)
have been used in the past to address this problem and feel free to add a reference or two (see the
class Web site for suggestions, or do a search in Google Scholar using appropriate keywords). 


3. Proposed Technical Approach 
Write a paragraph with a clear description of the methods and algorithms
you plan to use on the project. If the system you are building can be thought of as a pipeline with
multiple components feel free to provide a figure that illustrates the pipeline with blocks for
different components and brief descriptions of each component (e.g., the names of algorithms or
methods you plan to evaluate). Make sure it is clear what your pipeline or system is doing, i.e.,
what each component will do in terms of taking inputs and producing outputs. 

4. Data Sets 
Briefly describe what data set(s) you plan to use in the project. Include references to the data (e.g., a
URL) if you can. If for example you are doing document classification, you can describe for example
how many documents are in the data set, average document length, how many classification labels. If
you are using multiple data sets you could put this type of information in a table. Mention for
example whether you plan to work with data that already has a predefined vocabulary or whether you
plan to define your own vocabulary. If you are able to access and take an initial look at your data,
feel free to also include a figure or two in this section, e.g., a histogram of document lengths.
You can change your data sets during the project if you need to, but you should have identified at
least one data set to work with by the time you submit the proposal. 

5. Experiments and Evaluation
Provide a brief and clear description of how you will evaluate the results of your project, e.g.,
accuracy for classification, precision-recall for document ranking. Will you use cross-validation or
does your data set(s) come with a fixed train-test partition? For tasks like clustering or topic
modeling you may have to do some research to see how evaluation is done on these tasks. For some
projects you may have to do some user studies for evaluation, e.g., present users with results from
Algorithm A and Algorithm B, using the same input data for each algorithm, without telling the user
which algorithm is which, and have them select the one they prefer. 

6. Software 
Provide a list of the major pieces of project software that you expect to use, divided into 2 sets: (1)
publicly-available code, and (2) code will write yourself. This list will probably be incomplete at
this point (which is fine) since you may not know yet about all of the publicly-available software
that might be relevant to your project. My expectation is that most students will use Python, given
that we have been using Python in class and there are many useful publicly-available tools for text
analysis in Python. However, if you prefer to use a language such as Java that is ok too - please
indicate this clearly in this section. 

7. Milestones 
Provide a brief list of milestones. For
example, since the project will span 6 weeks of the class (weeks 5 to 10), you could break your
milestones into a list of 3 intermediate phases: •	Weeks 5 and 6 •	Weeks 7 and 8 •	Weeks 9
and 10 For example, much of the data gathering and preprocessing and coding (development and test)
could happen in the earlier weeks, and much of the experimentation and evaluation in the later
weeks. Note that you have a progress report due at the end of week 7.

8. [FOR 2-PERSON TEAMS ONLY] Individual Student Responsibilities 
Summarize briefly what each student
will be primarily responsible for in the project. For example, you might write something like this
Name 1: will write and test the code for Algorithms 1 and 2, will integrate components A and B in
the pipeline, will assist in doing experiments and interpreting results, will assist in writing
project reports 
Name 2: will acquire the data sets to test the algorithms, will preprocess the text
data (e.g., define the vocabulary for the algorithms), will implement Algorithm 3 and integrate all
the components into a pipeline, will write the scripts for evaluating the accuracy of the
algorithms, will assist in writing project reports. 
[Note these are just suggestions – you can and
should organize responsibilities in whatever way makes sense – and inevitably as the project
progresses these responsibilities may need to be changed as some tasks may take much more time (or
much less time) than originally expected.]
