Minutes of the WebDAV WG Meeting at IETF-42

The WebDAV working group held a meeting at the Chicago IETF on
Thursday, August 27, 1998, from 1PM to 3PM.  There were 55 people in
attendance.  The meeting was chaired by Jim Whitehead, and minutes
were taken by John Stracke, Stephen Martin, and Jim Davis.

Jim Davis presented on the Advanced Collections requirements document;
his slides are available at:

<http://www.ics.uci.edu/pub/ietf/webdav/chicago/ietf42acr.html>

The Advanced Collections requirements document is currently in WG Last
Call.  There were several issues raised concerning these requirements:

* There may be a requirement to be able to create a reference where the
  owner designates the destination as not visible.

* Should there be a choice about whether deleting the target of a direct 
  reference also deletes all (direct) references.

* Should access control of references be distinct from those of the target.

* Should the owner of a resource should be able to prevent creation of
  references to it using access control facilities?  This would affect
  requirements for access control, not advanced collections.

* Is there a need for references that pass some but not all operations.

* The documents need to be more clear on whether a reference is to a
  resources or to a URI.  Furthermore, the language defining a member 
  of a collection is not very precise in describing what a member is 
  (Resource vs URI).

Jim Davis next presented on the Advanced Collections protocol document.
Some modifications to the protocol were discussed:

* Add a new property dav:references, which provides backpointers from
  a target to all resources that refer to it.

* Redefine DAV's semantics for MOVE to insert a step between the COPY
  and the DELETE.  This inserted step, called UPDATE, updates any
  references to the resource, if possible, changing the ref-target
  property to reflect the new location.  This resolves a conceptual issue
  of when referential updates are performed when MOVE is defined as a
  COPY (which doesn't update references), followed by a DELETE.

* Remove the "dav:passthrough" property, instead, just define a
  dav:reftype property which takes either dav:direct or dav:indirect 
  values. The rationale for this change is the dav:passthrough 
  property would have allowed client to create paradoxical references, 
  e.g. ones which pass through GET but not HEAD. For a useful direct 
  reference, there seems to be only one sensible set of values for 
  what should be passed through, and what not, namely:

  affect target:
   GET, HEAD, PUT, POST, PROPFIND, PROPPATCH
  affect reference:
   DELREF, DELETE, COPY, or MOVE

  except that the returned headers from GET and HEAD include extra
  headers (Ref-Type and Ref-Target) added by the reference itself,
  which thus allow the client to discover that the reference is a
  reference.

* A question was raised concerning whether a direct reference can point 
  to a direct ref?  Yes.  All the Ref-Type and Ref-Target headers are 
  returned.  This is sufficient for the client to determine where the 
  reference points to.

* Since the DELETE method deletes a reference no matter what type, there
  is no need for the special DELREF method.

The ordered collections part of the document was skipped because Jim
Davis ran out of time.  However, ordered collections were discussed at
a breakout session on the Advanced Collections Protocol, held in the
afternoon on Wednesday, August 26.  Issues raised at this meeting
concerning ordered collections:

* The LOCK method must also take headers for assigning initial
  position in ordering, because a LOCK on a non-existent resource
  creates (at least temporarily) a new member of a collection.

* Rename the dav:arbitary ordering value to dav:custom.

  Some feel that the name dav:custom better reflects the meaning of a
  collection that is ordered, but where the ordering is ad-hoc and
  known only to a human.

  It allows for four possible conditions of ordering
   1) Not supported on server.  No orderingtype property.
   2) Supported, but this collection is not ordered.  dav:unordered
   3) dav:custom
   4) Some other URL

* Allowing the ORDERPATCH method to modify the position of more than one
  resource at a time was discussed.  Though objections to this were raised 
  at the Redmond meeting, noone at the breakout session could remember the
  rationale for this objection.

Lisa Dusseault Lippert presented on Access Control Goals, and her
slides are available at:

<http://www.ics.uci.edu/pub/ietf/webdav/chicago/access_control/>

Some discussion over the scope of this protocol: are we creating a
mechanism to manage underlying, pre-existing ACLs, or are we creating
a mechanism to manage DAV-specific ACLs? Consensus seems to be that
the latter is the case.

Issues raised during the presentation are:

* Should ACLs apply to properties, and should properties have access rights
  scoped to an individual property.

* Requirements should mention where and when the WebDAV access control
  facility relates to access control faclilies of other protocols.

* It should be a goal of the protocol to have a simple interitance
  mechanism. Dynamic vs static may not be necessary.

Chris Kaler presented results from the Raleigh meeting of the
Versioning and Variant Authoring design team.  His slides are
available online at:

<http://www.ics.uci.edu/pub/ietf/webdav/chicago/versioning/>

There was some discussion over why/whether versioning needs to support 
downlevel clients.

Jim Whitehead opened discussion on whether we need to do configuration
management or not.  Previously the WG said no; the versioning design
team feels that versioning without CM wouldn't be too useful, so we
should do something simple, at least.  Consensus seemed to be that CM
is going to be necessary for many customers, but a burden for some
others, so we should aim for a versioning protocol that can subset to
leave out the CM.

*** Meeting Adjourned ***
