
Web Versioning and Configuration Management (DELTA-V)

Chair(s):

TBD

Applications Area Director(s): 

Keith Moore <moore@cs.utk.edu>
Patrik Faltstrom <paf@swip.net>

Applications Area Advisor: 

TBD, probably Keith Moore <moore@cs.utk.edu>

Mailing Lists: 

General Discussion: ietf-dav-versioning@w3.org
To Subscribe: ietf-dav-versioning-request@w3.org
Subject: subscribe 
Archive: http://lists.w3.org/Archives/Public/ietf-dav-versioning/

Description of Working Group: 

This working group will define extensions to HTTP and the WebDAV
Distributed Authoring Protocol necessary to enable distributed Web
authoring tools to perform, in an interoperable manner, versioning and
configuration management of Web resources.

Versioning, parallel development, and configuration management are
important features for remote authoring of Web content.  Version
management is concerned with tracking and accessing the history of
important states of a single Web resource, such as a standalone Web
page.  Parallel development provides additional resource availability
in multi-user, distributed environments, letting authors make changes
on the same resource at the same time, later merging together those
changes. Configuration management addresses the problems of tracking
and accessing multiple interrelated resources over time as sets of
resources, not simply individual resources.  Traditionally, artifacts
of software development, including code, design, test cases,
requirements, help files, and more have been a focus of configuration
management. Web sites, comprised of multiple inter-linked resources
(HTML, graphics, sound, CGI, and others), are an important class of
complex information artifacts that benefit from the application of
configuration management.

The WebDAV working group originally focused on defining version
management capabilities for remote authoring applications. However, it
has become clear that while versioning functionality alone is useful
for a range of content authoring scenarios involving one, or a small
set of resources, versioning alone is insufficient for managing larger
sets of content. Protocol support for parallel development and simple
remote configuration management of Web resources provides
functionality for managing larger sets of interrelated content
developed by multiple users at different locations.

A sub-group of the WebDAV working group has developed functional
requirements for versioning and configuration management of Web
content. These requirements encompass the following capabilities,
which shall be considered by this working group:

IN-SCOPE: 

* Naming and accessing resource versions and configurations
* Creating new revisions of a resource
* Placing a resource under version and configuration control
* Parallel development
* History retrieval
* Differencing 
* Merging of revisions and configurations
* Operations on configurations
* Mapping resource versions and configurations to the URL namespace
* Versioning support for downlevel HTTP and WebDAV clients

Further information on these objectives can be found in the document,
"Goals for Web Versioning".

NOT IN SCOPE: 

* HTTP server to server communication protocols 
* Development process management, workflow, or change request management
* Versioning and configuration management via non-HTTP and WebDAV protocols.
* Implementation of functionality by non-origin proxies 

Deliverables 

The following documents are expected to form the final output of this
working group.

1. A goals document, which describes the high-level functional
   requirements for remote versioning and configuration management,
   including rationale. 

2. A model document, which describes the semantics of versioning,
   configuration management, and parallel development in a
   protocol independent fashion.  

3. A protocol specification, which describes new HTTP methods,
   headers, request bodies, response bodies, and WebDAV properties to
   implement the remote versioning and configuration management
   goals. 

4. A traceability document, which describes the mapping between goals
   and protocol features.

Goals and Milestones:

Since significant work on remote versioning and configuration
management has already taken place within the WebDAV working group,
the following schedule is a reasonable estimate of the remaining
effort, despite the scope of the working group.

Jun 99 (Specification, Goals, Model) Produce drafts of distributed
       versioning and configuration management protocol specification,
       as well as the goals and requirements documents. Submit as
       Internet Draft.

Jul 99 (Meeting, Specification, Goals, Model) Meet at Oslo IETF and
       hold working group meeting to review the protocol specification,
       goals, and model document.

Oct 99 (Goals) Create final version of distributed versioning and
       configuration management goals document. Submit for approval as
       Informational RFC.

Oct 99 (Specification, Model) Produce revised model document, and
       distributed versioning and configuration management protocol
       specification. Submit both as Internet Drafts.

Nov 99 (Meeting, Specification, Model) Meet at Washington, DC IETF and
       hold working group meeting to review the model document and the
       distributed versioning and configuration management protocol
       specification.

Feb 00 (Specification, Model, Traceability) Submit revised model
       document, and distributed versioning and configuration
       management protocol specification as Internet Drafts. Submit
       revised traceability document as an Internet Draft.

Mar 00 (Meeting, Specification, Model) Meet at Adelaide IETF and hold
       working group meeting to review the model document and
       distributed versioning and configuration management protocol
       specification.

Apr 00 (Specification, Model, Traceability) Submit revised model
       document, distributed versioning and configuration management
       protocol specification, and traceability document as Internet
       Drafts.  Hold working group last call for comments on all
       drafts.

May 00 (Specification, Model, Traceability) Revise model document,
       distributed versioning and configuration management
       specification, and traceability document based on working group
       last call comments, and submit specification to the IESG for
       approval as a Proposed Standard RFC, and submit the model and
       traceability documents to the IESG for approval as
       Informational RFCs.




